+++ 
title = "The Challenger, First Quarter, 2024"
deescription = "The magazine of the United States Blind Chess Association, <https://usblindchess.org/>"
date = "2024-03-01"
publishdate = "2024-03-01" 
draft = "false"
+++

## The Challenger

Magazine of the United States Blind Chess Association
December 2023

The mission of the USBCA is to promote the game of chess among the blind community.
Website: <http://usblindchess.org/>

## Disclaimer

The views expressed in the Challenger do not necessarily reflect the policies or views of the USBCA or those of the editor.

## President's Message

Well, another term has come and gone, and a new one is upon us. My
thanks to those of you who exercised your right as USBCA members and
cast your ballot. It's easy to think that it doesn't really matter, but
it truly does to those of us who are volunteering our time and effort
to keep this organization, founded by Jim Slagle and others, in
existence and growing. We saw some fantastic progress during the last
two years. We encountered, and weathered, some fairly serious
turbulence. We're taking steps to ensure that no one's contact
information is ever again used in any way not in keeping with the
owner's wishes. And, rest assured, we don't forget that the owner of
contact information is the person who shares it with us.

 Our plans for this year include acquiring 501C (3) status, and expanding
chess-playing opportunities, as well as preserving those opportunities
which have been around and enjoyed for these many years. As always, your
inputs are eagerly sought and welcomed. Don't be shy with them. Without
you, our membership, the USBCA would be largely irrelevant.

 Stay tuned in! And, let us hear from you!

 Jim Thoune, President, US Blind Chess Association

## Editor's Note

By Rita Crawford

Participation:

The action or state of taking part in something; an association with
others in a relationship as a partnership...

Club: ****To unite or combine for a common cause

As a member of the USBCA, you belong to a club. "A club: to unite or
combine for a common cause." This is important for you to remember
because belonging to this club helps you on a myriad of levels. This
club allows you to have friends around the world through the act of
interacting with them. Make no mistake about it, when you meet someone
over a chessboard, every single time you meet someone over a
chessboard a door to a potential friendship opens up. You choose how
much or how little you want to venture through that door. Either way,
that opportunity has presented itself because you are a member of the
United States Blind Chess Association (USBCA). All of us benefit when we
allow ourselves to open up and be receptive to new opportunities to meet
and interact with people. If it was not for the USBCA, would you have
had a chance to meet someone in the Philippines and play a game of chess
with them? Some people have made friendships over chessboards that have
lasted for years Even though they both lived thousands of miles apart.
What can you do to make sure the opportunity to meet new chess players,
make new friends and all of the benefits of the USBCA remain available
to you? Participate. Watch the emails on Freelists; join in and listen
to a Hands On Chess interview; join in on a Chess Queens meeting. Join
in voting for members of the USBCA board when the time arises. Join in.
You are the captain of your own ship--fill it with chess, and
friendships and participation in the USBCA events. I promise you will
be glad you did. You will realize you are lucky, because you belong to
something that opens doors for you to new cultures, new friends, new
chess games and all you have to do is participate. You are lucky because
you belong to a club that helps you grow intellectually, and helps your
friendship circle grow exponentially. You belong to the United States
Blind Chess Association.

## Getting to Know USBCA member: Richard Turner (Check out his website

link listed at the end of the article!

My name is Richard Turner. I prefer being called Richard, rather than
the various nicknames associated with that all too common first name.

I am not the card shark from Texas, I am a retired Vocational
Rehabilitation Instructor in Oregon. I've been happily married for
almost 32 years.

I love reading a wide variety of genres; listening to an equally wide
variety of music styles, playing chess, (though I'm not that good) and
gardening when my body allows it. I like quirky humor, live theater,
TV/movies, etc.

Around 2000, I taught myself HTML code and created a web page that was
initially mostly for Window-Eyes users. It has morphed into a page for
Apple devices, Windows related items, and a wide smattering of other
things. That continues to be an enjoyable hobby, as well as
participating in many email lists around technology.

My web site is:
<https://www.turner42.com>

## Attention: Special Training Offer

The new USBCA Board is looking for trainers for LiChess and for those
who would like to learn LiChess or become more proficient at it.

Those who are interested in either *training* or *learning* please send
an email to
<usblindchess@outlook.com>

## Election results

The USBCA recently held elections to choose new Board members. Here are
your new Board members for the next two years as voted on by you, the
membership:

- President-Jim Thoune
- Vice President-Glenn Crawford
- Secretary-Marilyn Bland
- Treasurer and Director of Public Relations and Outreach-Marietta
(Rita) Crawford
- Tournament Director-Mario Montalvo
- Webmaster and Director at Large-Jim Homme
- Remaining Directors at Large-Al Pietrolungo, Evan Reese, and Michael
Rodgerson

## Upcoming Events

### Hands On Chess Chat

The Hands on Chess Chat will be meeting March 2, 2024 at 11:00 Eastern /
16:00 UTC. Your USBCA President Jim Thoune will be the featured guest
speaker. If you have any questions regarding the USBCA or any specific
question as it relates to chess, this will be a great opportunity to ask
them. If you would prefer to email them to me, I will ask them on your
behalf. Send your question(s) to
<usblindchess@outlook.com>.
The Zoom link to join the meeting was distributed Thursday, 2/29/24.

### "Saturday Golden Moves" Arena Tournament on LiChess

Tournament!

Event Details:

- Date: March 2nd. 2024
- Time: 23:00 UTC
- Duration: 3 hours
- Time Control: 15 minutes + 10 seconds increment per move
-How to Join:
Simply click on the tournament link provided below to participate in the
"Saturday Golden Moves" Arena Tournament, the passcode is:
1224
the link is:
<https://LiChess.org/tournament/3z9fz1lG>

See the email dated 2/28/24 the USBCA Tournament Director Mario Montalvo
posted on Freelist for even more details. Be sure to take advantage of
this great opportunity!

### The Chess Queens

The Chess Queens gathering, hosted by Marilyn Bland, meets the third
Saturday of every month. The next Chess Queens gathering will be March
16, 2024. Watch your email for the start time and meeting link. This is
a women's group and the discussions are lively and informative.

## The 2024 US Blind Open Tournament and Chess Camp

The tournament and chess camp are being held in Northbrook, IL at the
Hilton Chicago Northbrook. The Tournament will be held July 12-14, 2024
and the chess camp will be July 14-19, 2024. As soon as there is more
details available it will be posted in the Sunday Smiles.

## Feature Article: **Purple Fest - Goa India**

By Marilyn Bland

What a way to start the new year - a chess tournament at a festival in
the state of Goa on the south west coast of India. The capital city,
Panaji, was where all the action happened.

Hosted and funded by the government, the aim of Purple Fest was to
promote awareness of sports and activities for people with disabilities
across the board. The chess tournament was part of this festival, and
was officially opened by the Minister of Social Affairs of the
Federation of Goa.

The All-India Chess Federation for the Blind (AICFB) organized this
international tournament from 8-13 January. It was a Swiss 7-round event
with a time control of 90 minutes plus 30 seconds' increment. There were
31 participants representing Austria, Kyrgyz, Sweden, Turkmenistan, USA,
and Uzbekistan. I was disappointed that there were only 4 female
participants, myself and 3 young ladies from India.

Though the tournament was a small one, it was competitive and there was
good spirit among the players. First and second places went to Subendhu
Kumar Patra and Gangolli Kishan, both from India, Followed by Jörgen
Magnusson from Sweden in third place. I struggled along, but finally
managed to draw my last game.

My hotel room was spacious and comfortable, though the internet was not
always up and running. In the mornings we would have breakfast and then
the vehicles would take us to the playing venue. The game hall was well
set up and I was thankful for air conditioning. I had left Dallas with
temperatures in the high 30s F, and arrived in India where the
temperatures were in the high 80s and low 90s F for the entire time.
Tables were positioned along the perimeter of the room, leaving the
center clear, so moving around was easy. Boards and clocks were set up
on each of the tables, but I preferred using my own smaller 10" board.
Some volunteers were available to take down game moves and give time
checks, others brought around refreshments from time to time, or
accompanied players to the restroom. Play would resume after lunch, and
we would return to the hotel after the last game of the day.

One afternoon the organizers had arranged a boat ride. On another early
evening a few of us went to have dinner on the famous Baga beach. It was
delightful to enjoy my meal with my bare feet resting in the soft sand
and waves breaking just a few yards away. And what about the food? Well,
I never imagined there were so many ways of serving rice: rice flakes,
rice crackers, rice salad, plain rice, seasoned rice, spiced rice,
vegetable rice, and all with names I absolutely cannot pronounce. My
taste buds certainly had a workout!   All too soon the tournament was
over, but I could not leave India without a hurried little shopping
spree mere hours before I had to rush to the airport.

The long flight home afforded me much time to reflect. Each time I
participate in an over-the board tournament, I realize just how much
there is to learn and gain from interacting face to face with other
chess players, and how much enjoyment there is in meeting in person the
people one plays either on-line or by email. I am motivated to improve
my game, to study more, and to encourage others to participate as much
as possible in whatever way they can in order to enrich their chess
journey and strengthen our chess community. I can't wait for the next
tournament!

## Spotlight-USBCA Consultant FM Kevin Bachler

By Glenn Crawford

Kevin Bachler is a FIDE master whose rating reached 2350 before he
stopped playing competitive chess. He is a coach certified as a FIDE
trainer and a professional chess coach for US Chess. He is also a FIDE
arbiter and trainer. Arbiters ensure games adhere to FIDE rules of
chess.

Born in northern Illinois in 1957, Kevin has always called "the land of
Lincoln" home. He is married and has a 37-year-old son who, like his
father, and with Kevin's guidance, became interested in chess at an
early age but stopped playing as a young adult after attaining a rating
of over 2100. Kevin taught his son chess when the boy was 5 years old
and entered into competition at that age.

Kevin organized a chess club for his son's school and attracted about
100 children to it. He has organized and run clubs and tournaments since
he was fourteen years old with his first being at his high school.

Kevin first became interested in chess at age ten or eleven. He said, At
that time, "Star Trek was out and Spock and Kirk played chess
sometimes.". So, I got interested in chess from that." He got his
first USCF rating of 1368 in 1971 when he entered a high school
tournament and finished with three wins and two losses. He steadily
improved his game over the next several years and attained his master's
rating in December, 1982.

Kevin is the founder of Caveman Chess. "I have for the past 25 years
run a summer chess camp. And, it's one of the two premier overnight
camps in the country." The name of Caveman Chess had it beginning in
1981 as Kevin was at expert level, working to become a national master.
He was participating in a tournament. FIDE master Albert Chow, after
watching Kevin play, shook his head and said to him, "'You play stone
age chess. You play like a caveman.'" Kevin's friends took the name
and ran with it. Thus, Kevin's nickname of caveman was born.

He has not finalized all details for the camp but said this year he
annual Caveman Chess Camp takes place in Chicago. Chess classes are
offered and based on a person's age and strength of play. He said,
"Campers are divided mainly by age and rating. Age goes away once they
are over eighteen. And, then, we use just rating." If someone has no
rating, "We go through some steps to try to figure out roughly how
strong they are so that they get in the right group." Kevin continued,
"We have three classes a day for Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday; two
classes on Thursday. We have an opening simul [simultaneous chess game
exhibition] and a closing simul. Instructors for classes are all FIDE
masters except for some of the classes for very young children. Those
instructors are typically at the expert level.

There will be chess tournaments that precede the actual Caveman Chess
Camp. The cost for the camp is not finalized but should start at $400
for the lower-level classes and increase to $1000 for the most advanced
classes. This includes two meals a day. There will be hotel
accommodations which cost extra. The cost for tournament participants
prior to the Caveman camp is $145 per night which is higher than the
hotel cost for the camp since it is weekend rates. Each room can be
occupied by up to four persons. This cost includes breakfast for up to
four people. When the camp starts on Sunday night, the hotel room cost
drops to $125, accommodating up to four people per room.

This year will be the second year Kevin has sponsored and incorporated
the US Blind Chess Championship into the Caveman camp. The US Blind
chess championship will take place just prior to the camp. Kevin said he
is working with US Chess to change the name to the US Blind Open Chess
Championship, which would indicate it is not an invitational tournament
but all players are welcome. The US Blind Open Chess Championship will
take place from July 12 through July 14 and the camp from July 14
through July 19, 2024 in Chicago at Northbrook, IL Hilton.

## Puzzles

Note: The starting positions for each of these puzzles is written in
long-hand, showing where on the board each piece is. The solutions for
all three appear after the final puzzle. Submitted by David
Rosenkoetter

### 1. Easy: White mates in 2

Starting Position:

White: King-f4; Rooks-b3 and d3.

Blak: K-h5; Queen-a6; Bishop-g6; Pawn-g4.

### 2. Harder

Starting position:

White: King-h4; Queen-e5; Knights-d7 and g5; Pawns-a4, b2, f2, g4, h3;

Black; King-h8; Queen-g7; Rook-g1; Bishop-a6; Pawns-b4, c5, f3, h7

### 3. Difficult: Find the Clearance Sacrifice

Dmitry Nadezhdin vs Isaac Boleslavsky, Tashkent, 1965

Starting Position:

White: King-c1; Queen-d3; Rooks-d2 and h1; Bishops: e2 and f2;
Knight-d5; Pawns-a3, b2, c2, e4, g2, h4;

Black: King-g8; Queen-a5; Rooks-a8 and c8; Bishops-c6 and e7;
Knight-f6; Pawns-a6, b4, d6, e5, f7, g7, h6.

### Solutions

```
1. Rh3+ gxh3 2. Rxh3#
1. Nf7+ Kg8 2.Qe8+ Qf8 3.Qxf8#
1 ...Bxd5 2. exd5 Rc3 3. bxc3 Qxa3+ 4. Kb1 bxc3
```

## Ex-Champing at The Bit

This article was initially published in the February 2022 UK BCA
Gazette.

A. Botez (2005) - V. Pechenkin (2408), Canadian Open Toronto 2011.

 Yes, another "David Versus Goliath" battle that Round 1 of a large
national Open must throw up.
Perhaps some information on our "Mismatched Gladiators" might assist?
Alexandra: Approaching her 16th birthday, joint winner of the Womens
Canadian Youth Championship in 2009, destined to regularly represent
Canada in the Womens Olympiad.
Vladimir: Mid-30s established FIDE Master more than capable of punching
above his weight, evidenced by him winning a strong event at Edmonton
some 7 months after this tournament.
These 400 Elo point disparities impose different problems to each
opponent.
Chess For Tigers, an excellent practical handbook from Simon Webb,
offers good advice to both opponents when paired in this way.
To the lower-rated: Play a gambit, choose activity whenever possible,
seek opportunities to complicate, the hope is something unexpected
neither player could have anticipated will appear when the complexities
escalate.
In essence, cross your fingers and make it murky, hoping your opponent
will get stranded in the swamp.
The alternative is to let the stronger player slowly but surely
accumulate small advantages until the position of the weaker player
falls apart, you go down never having thrown a punch.
To the higher-rated: Be patient, do not try to blast the opponent off
the board.
Instead pose tricky strategic questions on how to continue, keep it
under control.
No need to fear an equal-looking late middlegame, it is in the endgame
where a higher-rated should outplay the lesser-rated.
Well, this is what Simon Webb recommends.
Fine for the higher-rated here, but what if the lower-rated does not
play gambits, instead preferring a calm positional approach?

`1. d4 f5`

 Immediately signaling aggressive middlegame intentions with the Dutch
Defence.
In simple terms, black will focus on kingside activity with ideas of
launching a mating attack.
White usually blocks the centre then starts pushing queenside pawns
while trying to keep the black kingside activity under control.
Hand-tohand fighting should be on the agenda but not quite yet.
We shall have an unspoken temporary agreement of "Non-Hostility", both
players sensibly choose well-known development plans.

```
2. c4 Nf6
3. g3 e6
4. Bg2 Be7
5. Nc3 O-O
6. Nf3 d6
7. O-O a5
```

 White usually plans pawn c5 to start the queenside fighting.
This almost always requires a support from a pawn on the b4 square.
By advancing pawn a5 black plans trading pawns on b4 either gaining the
fully-open a-file or trading rooks on a1 reducing the number of active
white units for the queenside battle.

`8. Qc2 Nc6`

 Supporting a central pawn e5 break.

```
9. a3 e5
10. d5 Nb8
```

 Having achieved supporting the advance of the e-pawn the black knight
is not bothered about being pushed backward, it has a perfectly
satisfactory alternate posting available.
The apparent loss of a couple of tempi is of little consequence, the
centre is closed and the black king is sufficiently protected.
White to play produces a concept of such depth it leaves Grand Rabbit
wondering how to explain it.
Perhaps the easier road to take is to comment as the game proceeds and
summarise once it has been executed?

`11. Ng5`

 Surely breaking the rule of voluntarily moving a piece twice in the
opening when other units could make good use of the tempo?
Not really.
White has a manoeuvre in mind which gives stability to the kingside, a
case of getting a retaliatory defence in place before it is needed.
Black to play chooses to start some trickery.
This strategy is not automatically bad, white is being asked to answer
questions correctly.

`11. ... Ng4`

 A doubler.
Firstly, a double-attack is unleased onto the singly-defended white g5
knight.
Secondly, the black g4 knight is probing at the white h2 pawn, a queen
manoeuvre of Qe8 - Qh5 will set a mate threat, not a forcing attack but
will require white to be aware of it.
Instead 11. ... h6 12. Nh3 g5 sets up a potential kingside pawn-roller,
which supported with harmonious black piece-placement, might be very
difficult to restrain.

`12. Nh3`

 All part of the "Master-Plan" for this knight, any ideas just where
it will eventually influence the middlegame?

`12. ... Na6`

 Black now has complete control of important dark squares, namely b4
and c5, which white must control if the usual queenside activity is to
appear.

`13. Rb1`

 A doubler.
Firstly, the necessary advance of pawn b4 is now doubly-supported and
therefore safe.
Secondly, the queen's rook escapes the x-ray attack from the black a8
rook.
Instead 13. b4 axb4 14. axb4 Nxb4 with a tempo attack on the white c2
queen, black would be safely snatching a pawn.

`13. ... Qe8`

 Heading kingside where the action must occur for black in the
Classical Dutch.

```
14. b4 axb4
15. axb4 Qh5
```

 Important move for white to find here, and might have been in mind
when 11. Ng5 appeared on the board.

`16. f3`

 A move of mixed consequences.
The Gains: Pushing back the black knight will make it more difficult for
black to weave a mating net.
When a unit moves it vacates a square for someone else, f2 is now
available to white for future piece-shuffling.
The Loss: Fianchetto bishops enjoy having their long diagonal open, the
g2 bishop might be inactive for quite a while, or possibly worse?

`16. ... Nh6`

 A common means of trying to break up the white defences can begin
with black pushing pawn f4, retreating with Nf6 would block the vital
support of the f8 rook.

`17. Nf2`

 On h3 this knight might become a target for tactics, a potential
black line-opening pawn f4 would unleash the lurking c8 bishop, the
threat is cancelled before it can arise.

```
17. ... Bd7
18. Nd3
```

 More shuffling.
This knight has now consumed 5 tempi to arrive at the final destination
planned for it when 11. Ng5 hit the board.
Yes, white is flouting the good advice on developing pieces quickly.
However since the position is closed and there are no weaknesses on
which black can focus then it is safe for the moment.

`18. ... g5`

 Thematic.
Black should not fear advancing kingside pawns.
Opening up lines for the pieces with pawn trades is the standard means
of attacking in the Classical Dutch.

`19. Be3`

 Development for both sides finally completed.
Perhaps some thoughts on how our "Mismatched Gladiators" have been
coping with the rating disparity might assist?
White: Lower-rated: No signs of panic, no sense of fear, reproduced the
strategic ideas of the opening system to achieve a solid position.
Black: Higher-rated: The temptation to blast white off the board has
been resisted.
Serious testing will take place in the middlegame, and if need be, later
in the endgame.
But how does the position stand?
White: A sensible balance between queenside attack and kingside defence
has been struck.
The curious path of the king's knight to d3 allows it to play on either
side of the board according to demands.
Black: Trying to hold the queenside while being ready to launch a
kingside assault.
It is black to play with several options in need of sifting, serious
commitment is in the air.

`19. ... e4`

 Is this the best move available to black?
Fritz and friends could spend hours and most likely disagree on how
black should continue.
Decisions must be made as the clock remorselessly ticks on.
A different approach is a plan involving Kh8 - Rg8 and maybe Raf8 before
deciding which kingside pawn should advance.
Also dropping the black queen back to g6 which combined with Nf7 allows
the h-pawn to advance to maximise line-opening options.
Or perhaps even better a hybrid of both plans could be considered.
The game move is setting a tactical trap, the testing of the lower-rated
player has just escalated.

`20. Nf2`

 White passes the test.
Instead 20. fxe4 Ng4 threatens mate on h2, but after 21. h3 Nxe3 white
drops a piece while receiving an exchange fork, the c2 queen and f1 rook
being hit, disaster.

`20. ... f4`

 Black definitely has the initiative, pawn advances claim space as
they hit white pieces.
Of course the white units can dance around in reply, but as they do so
no progress is made on the queenside.

`21. g4`

 Closing the kingside with a tempo-attack on the black queen avoids
losing the e3 bishop.
Instead the immediate 21. Bd4 would be met with the same idea from black
as in game.

```
21. ... Qe8
22. Bd4
```

 This bishop is more active on the a1 - h8 diagonal.
Though careful consideration was needed before playing here, at the
moment it has no safe flight squares.
Instead retreating with 22. Bc1 would only leave it pointing at a black
pawn chain.

`22. ... e3`

 Black demonstrates flexibility of thinking.
Usually the Classical Dutch involves good piece activity in front of the
white king, prodding and probing to force fatal weaknesses.
Clearly such general plans would involve opening files somewhere with
pawn trades, then perhaps throw in an appropriate piece sacrifice
somewhere to further open up the white king.
However here black tries to lock up the white kingside, it is the
fianchetto g2 bishop who is being imprisoned inside a white pawn chain.
Well, this is of course true providing black manages to maintain the
constricting g5 - f4 - e3 pawn wall.

`23. Nd3 c5`

 Black chooses to force matters on the queenside.
There is some sense in this approach, white is essentially a piece down
for the ending if the g2 bishop remains entombed.
Instead trying to trap the white d4 bishop with 23. ... b6 fails, a
couple of ideas run:
(A). 23. ... b6 24. Ne4 c5 25. bxc5 bxc5 26. Ba1, when the trapped g2
bishop is still a worry.
(B). 23. ... b6 24. Ne4 c5 25. dxc6 Bxc6 26. Bxb6white has snatched a
pawn but that g2 bishop still suffers.
However with the advantage of "Annotator Hindsight" perhaps 23. ...
Bf6 which will force the exchange of dark square bishops might have been
simpler.

`24. bxc5 dxc5`

 An important couple of changes have occurred to the pawn structure.
White now has a protected passed d-pawn, it cannot get far at the moment
but it must be kept under control by black.
Whith the trade of the white b4 pawn the b1 rook attacks the unprotected
black b7 pawn which must be protected.

`25. Be5 Nb4`

 Closing the semi-open b-file with a tempo-attack on the white c2
queen.
Instead either 25. ... Ra7 or 25. ... Bc8 would be placing pieces on
worse squares than they presently occupy.

`26. Nxb4`

 White could move the queen, but where could she go and maintain ideas
of influencing the centre and kingside as she does on the c2 square?

`26. ... cxb4`

 Black gets a passed pawn, protected by the e7 bishop, but it cannot
advance, it is simply waiting to be surrounded and then captured.

`27. Ne4`

 A doubler.
Firstly, this fights for control of the f6 square, black cannot
challenge with Bf6 to force a trade of bishops; white is beginning to
get some play.
Secondly, the e4 knight is pressuring the black g5 pawn.
This means the e7 bishop is now tied down to keeping a defence on the
important base of the strangling g5 - e3 pawn chain as well as guarding
the b4 pawn.
Overloaded pieces such as the e7 bishop are prime candidates for
exploitation.

`27. ... Qg6`

 A doubler.
Firstly, the important clamping g5 pawn is given an extra defence.
Secondly, the white e4 knight is pinned to the unprotected c2 queen,
this surely immobilises it?
It is white to play, the centralised white e4 knight and e5 bishop are
battling hard on the dark squares, this strongly hints how white should
proceed.

`28. d6`

 A brave move to play against an opponent with a 400+ Elo rating
points advantage.
This pawn advance comes with mixed consequences.
The Gains: The black e7 bishop is forced to retreat to the black back
rank which disconnects the a8 and f8 rooks.
Pushing the bishop off the f8 - a3 diagonal means the b4 pawn is now
undefended.
The Loss: Albeit temporary, the white d6 pawn is not supported by
another white pawn, black might be able to gang up on it with pieces.

```
28. ... Bd8
29. Rxb4
```

 Time to think again how our "Mismatched Gladiators" have fought so
far.
White: Calmly bounces back non-committal moves, demanding to be
outplayed, out-thought, out-consused, depending on how the opponent
chooses to fight.
Essentially forcing the higher-rated to show their greater skills, no
self-destruction here.
Black: Started with aggressive intent, the Dutch Defence is not a weapon
of neutralisation, hand-to-hand fighting is on the agenda.
Flexibility of thinking has however taken over, the opportunity to trap
the white g2 bishop replaced the usual desire to rip into the white
kingside.
Annotator Opinion: Both players have chosen a sensible approach.
As expected the higher-rated has gained a significant positional
advantage, the trapped white g2 bishop, which should be the decisive
factor in the endgame.
But we are still in the middlegame, tricks and traps into which the
unwary can fall are just sitting there.

`29. ... Nf7`

 Surely giving white a difficult choice of choosing between:
(A). 30. Ba1 Nxd6 white keeps the bishop on the board but loses the
important d6 pawn.
(B). 30. Qb2 Nxe5 31. Qxe5 Bc6 black is beginning to unravel with the
advantage of having the bishop pair and white still has a trapped g2
bishop to sort out.
However we must remember that every move made in a game is a test of all
chess skills.
Tactical event horizons, positional comprehension, time-management,
emotional control and much more.
Databases are full of examples where the higher-rated outplays and beats
the lower-rated.
Fine, but the statistics also report that the underdog sometimes comes
out on top.
White to play has a "Window Of Opportunity" to open.
It just needs the thought to occur that a higher-rated player can
actually misjudge the position and make a mistake.

`30. Nf6+`

 Surely this is the lower-rated player making a simple tactical
mistake?
Black has 2 units guarding the f6 square, d8 bishop and g6 queen, but as
the white knight arrives there is only defended once by the e5
bishop.
Looks like the pressure has got to white, all the previous hard work is
now of no value, right?

`30. ... Bxf6`

 Walking into an x-ray attack by moving the g8 king onto the h8 - a1
diagonal should not be contemplated; some ideas run:
(A). 30. ... Kg7 31. Nxd7+ Kh6 32. Qxg6+ hxg6 33. Nxf8 Nxe5 34. Rxb7
Nxc4 35. d7 white has won a rook in the trading plus the white passed
d-pawn is very strong.
(B). 30. ... Kg7 31. Nxd7+ Kg8 32. Qxg6+ hxg6 33. Nxf8 Nxe5 34. Ne6 and
white has won a rook in the trading.
(C). 30. ... Kh8 Nxd7+ Kg8 transposes into line (B) just given.
(D). 30. ... Kg7 31. Nxd7+ Nxe5 32. Qxg6+ hxg6 33. Nxe5 white has won a
piece in the trading.
(E). 30. ... Kg7 31. Nxd7+ Nxe5 32. Qxg6+ Nxg6 33. Nxf8 Nxf8 34. Rxb7+
white has won an exchange plus b-pawn which creates a pair of connected
central passed pawns.

`31. Qxg6+`

 All part of the white "Master-Plan", a guardian of f6 is
eliminated, the apparent black control of this square was illusory.

```
31. ... hxg6
32. Bxf6 Bc6
```

 Consolidating.
White is not permitted the luxury of connected passed pawn by capturing
the black b7 pawn.
There is still the white passed d6 pawn to be restrained, but with 3
units controlling the d8 promotion square it seems black should be
winning.
It is the trapped white non-contributing bishop which is going to be the
deciding factor, right?
Perhaps matters are not so simple.
When black was forced to trade Bxf6 the white dark square bishop became
a very powerful piece.
Only sensibly challengeable by the black knight, unless black is
prepared to give up an exchange to eliminate this potentially powerful
prelate.
But surely the black c6 bishop has an even stronger grip on the light
squares?
This is so, but where in the white defences can it produce pressure
while it is tied to defending the b7 pawn?
Also the apparent extra black piece, the f7 knight, is tied to defending
the important g5 pawn.
If that pawn falls the entire constricting black pawn chain might
disappear.

`33. Rd1 Ra2`

 Black takes the chance to play actively.
Fine, but perhaps initially placing the king on h6 to protect the g5
pawn and so releasing the f7 knight for action elsewhere might have been
simpler before trying to force matters?
Maybe time on the clocks is becoming a critical factor?
Perhaps black is guessing the rating disparity will automatically favour
the higher-rated player when decisions need to be made quickly?
This is a good generalization, but sometimes positions can spin out of
control as the complications escalate.

`34. Bf1 Rd2`

 A doubler.
Firstly, an interference, the white d1 support to the advanced passed d6
pawn is broken.
Secondly, black reinstates a third defence on the d8 square, albeit by
x-ray.

`35. Rbb1`

 Probably the simplest, leaving black to work out the consequences of
making captures.
A couple of choices doubtlessly considered run:
(A). 35. Rxd2 exd2 36. Rb1 Ba4 and the passed black d2 pawn is about to
cost white a whole rook.
(B). 35. Ra1 Rxd6 36. Be7 Rd2 37. Bxf8 Kxf8 and while white has snatched
an exchange the combination of the black minor pieces against the white
rook is not easy to asses.
Black to play "Punches The Random Button", setting the lower-rated
player a tricky test.

`35. ... Nxd6`

 A move of mixed consequences.
The Gains: A dangerous opposing advanced passed pawn is eliminated plus
the black knight is finally getting active.
The Loss: Defence of the vital g5 pawn is relinquished, the compressing
black pawn chain is at risk of being dismantled.
But maybe white has something better than snatching a pawn?
This is the tricky test handed to white, and sifting through the
trickery will consume clock-time.

`36. Be7`

 With the advantage of "Annotator Hindsight" white seems to be
failing the test, the time-trouble trickery might be paying off.
Skewering the black d6 knight and f8 rook in an attempt to win material
is the confusion-trap black set.
Much more relevant is 36. Bxg5 when the black dark square pawn chain
might fall and a timely white pawn h4 begins the process of freeing the
trapped white light square bishop.
Black to play must have prepared an answer to the obvious bishop skewer,
but what?

`36. ... Nxc4`

 Black reveals the method in the apparent madness.
An exchange loss is offered on f8 for the gain of the white central
pawns plus the creation of a passed b-pawn.
Teamwork of black bishop, knight, pawn, will seriously test a white
rook, much pressure on white to hold the position.
White to play is still sitting that tricky test.

`37. Rdc1`

 Well played!
Meeting complication with counter-complication, excellent strategy as
the time-control approaches.
Though the position is not particularly complex, playing a
"Non-Obvious" move can sometimes throw an opponent off balance as
vital seconds on the clock tick down.

`37. ... Rf7`

 Similarly well played!
Black forces white to choose between capturing the loose black c4 knight
or save the e7 bishop, more time consumption on the white clock.

`38. Bxg5`

 Definitely the simplest way to handle the position, the tricky-test
is over, white has passed.
Black has been hoping white will play a line where this dark square
bishop trades itself for the f8 rook.
White has finally correctly assessed it is of greater value than a black
rook, the dismantling of the black pawn chain is under way, which will
eventually permit the release of the light square bishop.
Tactics were however available with 38. Bb4, black would have an
exchange on d2 to worry about while the c4 knight still hangs, but how
much time does white have too find and then judge them?
And what if the searches revealed nothing acceptable, time would have
been expended for no return.
A couple of sample lines run:
(A). 38. Bb4 Rd4 39. Bc5 Rfd7 40. Rb4 b5 leaving white to decide to give
up the dominance of the dark squares for an exchange gain with 41. Bxd4,
not easy to assess.
But black can set another tricky test for white by standing firm.
(B). 38. Bb4 Rfd7 39. Bxd2 exd2 and now the tree of complexity begins to
expand considerably.
Instead of offering line after line perhaps a discussion of ideas for
both players might be better?
White has the c1 rook en prise, it must make a decision.
If it captures with Rxc4 then black promotes the d2 pawn costing white a
rook leading to material equality but the resulting pawn structure
imbalance is not easy to assess.
If it instead defends with Rd1 black simply wins an exchange back with
Ne3, and this will be followed by Ba4, white must give up the remaining
rook on the d2 pawn, black wins.
White can now free the f1 bishop with pawn e4, but black captures fxe3
to create advanced connected passed pawns, dangerous.
When black captures exd2 the e3 square is vacated for the c4 knight,
further fighting for the important d1 promotion square.
These ideas lead Grand Rabbit to conclude the lower-rated player
correctly chose the simpler capture of the black g5 pawn.
Instead entering into complications by snatching an exchange might just
give the higher-rated player the opportunity to demonstrate their
superiour skills of calculation.

`38. ... Ne5`

 Setting up some dangerous tactics, white is in danger of being blown
away.

```
39. Rc5
1-0
```

 Why is black resigning in a position which is very unclear?
Perhaps it was not resignation but a loss on time?
There are a few tricks available to black, maybe it was trying to sift
out the most favourable idea which resulted in flag-fall?
Fritz and friends would enjoy crunching out many lines to show who, if
anyone, could play for a decisive advantage.
Instead here are some aging bio-organic computations to indicate the
complexity in the position:
(A). 39. ... Nd7 40. Rc4 and black is losing the f4 pawn with the e3
pawn also soon likely to fall.
(B). 39. ... Rd5 40. Rxd5 Bxd5 41. Rb5 Rd7 42. Bxf4 Nc4 it is white,
now a good pawn up, thinking in terms of trying to win by advancing the
kingside pawns to release the f1 bishop.
Retreat moves gain black nothing, so search for something dynamic.
(C). 39. ... Bxf3 40. exf3 Nxf3+ 41. Kh1 Rxh2+ mate, but white has much
better available than this sad blunder.
(D). 39. ... Bxf3 40. Rxe5 Bxe2 41. Bxe2 Rxe2 42. Rf1 f3 43. Rxe3 Rg2+
44. Kh1 Rxg4 45. h4 f2 46. Re2 and the black f2 pawn falls, white with
the extra bishop has a win with careful technique.
Note the tricky black continuation of 46. ... Rh7 fails as 47. Rexf2
Rxg5 48. Rf8+ Kg7 49. R1f7+ Kh6 50. Rxh7+ Kxh7 51. hxg5 and white has
won a rook in the trading.
(E). 39. ... Bxf3 40. Rxe5 Bxg4 41. Re4 Bxe2 42. Bxe2 Rxe2 43. Bxf4 Rh7
44. Rxe3 and white again has a technical win.
(F). 39. ... Bxf3 40. Rxe5 Bxg4 41. Re4 f3 42. exf3 Bxf3 43. Rxe3 white
again should win with good technique.
Perhaps varying the black method of attack will offer better chances?
(G). 39. ... Nxf3+ 40. Kh1 Nxg5+ black wins a piece with a discovered
check, white can resign here.
(H). 39. ... Nxf3+ 40. exf3 Bxf3 41. Bc4 e2 42. Re1 Rd1 43. Kf2 Bc6 44.
Bxf4 white can pick off the black e2 pawn at leisure and there is still
an exchange on f7 to be taken, white wins.
(I). 39. ... Nxf3+ 40. exf3 Bxf3 41. Bc4 e2 42. Re1 Rd1 43. Kf2 Bxg4
44. Rc7 and black will lose a whole rook on the f7 square.
Is it that 39. ... Nf3+ is not right, or could it just require a
different black follow-up?
(J). 39. ... Nxf3+ 40. exf3 e2 41. Bg2 Rd1+ 42. Kf2 e1=Q+ mate but
white can avoid this disaster.
(K). 39. ... Nxf3+ 40. exf3 e2 41. Bxe2 Rxe2 42. Rf1 Re8 43. Rc4 Ref8
saving the f4 pawn, the presence of opposite bishops strongly hints a
draw is on the horizon
Grand Rabbit concludes that if line K is the best available to both
players then a draw would be the eventual result.
So why did black not play it?
It is most likely that black found it but kept searching the other
variations in the hope of finding a forcing favorable line, a "Win At
All Costs" approach, but failed to find a clincher.
Such is the pressure on higher-rated players in early rounds of large
Open events.
And oh yes, congratulations to the victorious "Out-Gunned Gladiator"
for evading the flying flack, assuming they had guns in those days.

**If you have questions, comments, or feedback, please send them to the
USBCA Secretary, Marilyn Bland, at
<tinkerbelltx@hotmail.com>
